So, remember that in the last lecture,
we talked about the Node architecture,
where two fundamental parts
are the thread pool and the event loop.
So in this lecture, you're gonna learn
all about threads and a thread pool.
And in the next one,
we will then dive deep into the event loop.
So, let's get started.
So, first off, when we use Node on a computer,
it means that there is a Node process
running on that computer.
And the process is just a program in execution.
And we already learned that Node.js
is basically a C++ program,
which will therefore start a process when it's running.
This is important because in Node,
we actually have access to a process variable,
which we're gonna use later in this course.
Now in that process, Node.js runs
in a so called, single thread.
And a thread is basically just a sequence of instructions.
But it's not important to deeply understand
what a thread or a process is.
That is more about computer science.
Just imagine a thread as being a box
where our code is executed in a computer's processor.
Now, what is important to understand here,
is the fact that Node runs in just one thread,
which makes it easy to block Node applications.
And this is something that we talked about before, actually.
But it's something really, really important to remember
because this is one of the unique features
that Node.js brings to the table.
So, again, if you run your Node application,
it'll run in just a single thread.
No matter if you have 10 users or 10 million users
accessing your application at the same.
And so you need to be very careful
about not blocking that thread.
And we will of course, take care of that
throughout the project in this course.
Moving on, let's now quickly understand
exactly what happens in a single thread
when you start your Node application.
So when the program is initialized,
all the top level code is executed,
which means all the code that is
not inside any callback function.
Also, all the modules that your app needs are required
and all the callbacks are registered,
just like the ones that we used
for our HTP server in the Node Farm App.
Remember that?
Then after all that, the event loop finally starts running.
And again, more about the event in loop in the next video.
What you need to know for now is that the event loop
is where most of the work is done in your app.
So, it's really the heart of the entire Node architecture.
But here is the catch, some tasks are actually too heavy.
They are too expensive to be executed in the event loop
because they would then block the single thread.
And so, that's where the thread pool comes in,
which just like the event loop,
is provided to Node.js by the libuv library
that we talked about before.
So, the thread pool gives us four additional threads
that are completely separate from the main single thread.
And we can actually configure it up to 128 threads.
But usually, these four are enough.
So these threads together formed a thread pool.
And the event loop can then automatically
offload heavy tasks to the thread pool.
And all this happens automatically behind the scenes.
It's not us developers who decide
what goes to thread pool and what doesn't.
Now, the expensive tasks that do get offloaded
are all operations dealing with files,
everything related to cryptography, like caching passwords,
then all compression stuff, and also DNS lookups,
which basically matches web domains
to their corresponding real IP addresses.
So this is the stuff that would
most easily block the main thread.
And so, Node takes care of automatically
offloading them into the thread pool,
where they don't block our event loop.
And that is the most important thing
that I want you to retain from this video.
So, let's now move on and talk about the event loop itself.